so we talked a little bit about
open-ended problem solving and
closed-ended problem solving and how
gamers actually how games shape them but
being very good at analytical thinking
with a defined solution so they're very
good at things like puzzles where you
sort of have a particular sandbox to
work in and a gamer is really good at
figuring out how to get from point A to
point Z if you show them where point A
is and if you show them where point Z is
they struggle with open-ended
problem-solving which is a problem that
you kind of don't know where the end
point is for example finding a job like
how do you know if the job that you
found is good enough could you find a
job that paid you a little bit more
could you find a job that had a better
boss like how do you know when that ends
how do you beat the game of finding a
job because you don't really know what
the end point is a lot of gamers think
that the reason they struggle with
open-ended problems like finding a job
or finding a girlfriend is because you
guys think you're lazy and if you
weren't lazy then everything would be
easier in life and you're just someone
who drew the short straw and you're lazy
that's actually not the case in my
experience there are some kinds of
people other groups of people that
struggle with open-ended problem-solving
and there's a particular group that is
very smart and not lazy at all but still
struggles with open-ended
problem-solving and that group actually
happens to be doctors crazy I know but
in order to understand how a doctor and
why a doctor struggles with open-ended
problem-solving we have to track back to
the mind of like the 15 year old kid who
decides that they want to be a doctor so
you've got this 15 year old kid who's at
a Christmas party that they're at at
their you know their friends their
family friends have a Christmas party
and they're going there and they see
someone that they haven't seen in a year
and that adult asks them what do you
want to be when you grow up and then
that kid says I want to be a surgeon and
then everyone's like so impressed it
like oh my god like you're gonna be a
surgeon that's amazing like you're so
smart
and they sort of the kid you know just
by saying telling people that you want
to be a surgeon somehow that makes the
kid more respected so the kid decides
I'm gonna be a surgeon because everyone
thinks that that's awesome and I'm a
good person
and I'm going to make a lot of money and
I'm gonna perform surgery on people and
I'm gonna save lives and so what does
that kid actually do they go to their
school counselor and they say you know I
want to I want to be a doctor one day
and so the school counselor is like okay
so you have to like take a bunch of AP
classes you have to do really well on
your SAT here's like the Princeton
Review or the Kaplan course that you
should take and so the kid sort of gets
this script to to how to be successful
and how to get into a good college so
they studied really hard they take the
AP classes they study for the SAT they
work really hard and they kind of do
everything that they're supposed to and
they end up with a good GPA a good SAT
score and then they go and they talk to
their school counselor and the school
counselor says you should apply to Ivy
League universities you should apply to
Harvard and Yale and Stanford and UCLA
and UC Berkeley and you should apply to
all these wonderful institutions like
Cornell and Columbia and so the kid goes
to those websites and downloads all
those applications and fills out a bunch
of applications and then writes a bunch
of essays and then writes exactly I mean
the school tells you what's right they
say write 500 words about a challenge
that you faced in your life and it's all
scripted so they don't actually have to
think about what they're doing because
everything is laid out for them so they
get into college and then when they're
getting oriented as a freshman they meet
their academic adviser and they tell
their academic advisor I want to you
know become a doctor and so the academic
adviser tells them what to do and they
say okay you've got to take pre-med
courses you've got to take biology
you've got to take physics you've got to
take chemistry in your third year of
college you have to take the medical
college admissions test which is like
the SAT for medical school and then you
also need to do some kind of
volunteering you need to do some kind of
leadership experience you need to do
some kind of research so they once again
get a script of like ABCDE F and G of
boxes they need to check and they start
plotting along and they work really hard
and they do all of those different
things and then they apply to medical
school and the medical school invites
them for an interview and so the medical
school tells the kid okay now that
you've sent us all this paperwork this
application in these
says--and things like that about why you
want to be a doctor come to our medical
school on this day and make sure you
wear suit and then we're gonna ask you
why you want to be a doctor and then
based on that and your MCAT scores and
your GPA will either accept you into our
medical school or we won't so the kid
gets accepted to medical school they go
to medical school and then once again
it's like you don't sign up for
particular classes in med school you
sort of have to learn everything so you
go to class every day and you study
really hard and you take a bunch of
tests and then you kind of do what
you're told and then third year medical
school rolls around and that's when you
start doing these things called
rotations so the first two years of
medical school you're kind of a student
you're sitting in a chair just like in
college or in high school but the last
two years of medical school you're
actually working in a hospital and so
you're following doctors around and
you're doing things like learning how to
tie sutures and learning how to give
injections and you're kind of in awe in
the hospital actually doing the work of
a doctor so they do that for a little
while and then after that you do this
thing called apply to residency so after
medical school is when you really learn
how to be a doctor and that's during
residency so you do different kinds of
residency there's a surgery residency
there's a psychiatry residency that's
the one that I did I'm a psychiatrist
and so when you go but once again it's
like a it's just like college
applications or medical school
applications you fill out an application
I write an essay about why I want to be
a psychiatrist or why I think that the
field of Psychiatry is exciting and I
didn't write about video game addiction
back then because it wasn't really a
thing and people didn't really know what
that was and it's even still sort of
just becoming a thing at least within
the academic community and so you end up
sort of applying the residency and then
you interview and then you get matched
there's a computer program that tells
you where you end up going for residency
so you go to your residency and you
train there for four years and during
residency they tell you they're like
okay so on day one you need to show up
at this hospital at this time and work
on this unit and then on day 31 you're
gonna be on call overnight in the
hospital so you have to show up here and
do this kind of work so every step of
the way they tell you exactly what to do
and then you finish residency and most
people finish residency somewhere
between the ages of 30 30 and 30
five depending on what you do and/or 29
and 35 and that's when just pause and
think about this for a second that's the
first time that this person applies for
a job so like you have a 34 year old guy
who's like a neurosurgeon who is never
applied for a job never applied for a
job
he's just been he boarded the train and
the train has its tracks and he just
goes along the track goes along the
track goes along the track and then he
gets off the track and the guy has never
applied for a job so a lot of doctors
actually struggle with like job
negotiations and a lot of doctors the
first couple of years after they
finished medical school get chronically
underpaid because they actually don't
know what they're worth they feel
embarrassed asking for more money so
they go to their chief and their chief
says well why don't you work here why
don't you work here and they apply for
different jobs but they actually don't
know like they've never worked anywhere
all they've ever done is fill out
applications take tests go to class and
do exactly what they've been told to do
so doctors actually struggle a lot with
like basic life skills like paying taxes
and stuff like that because they haven't
done that I mean you've got a 34 year
old guy who's I mean they have paid
taxes but you know their taxes are
really simple
they've never they've never found a job
they've never thought about you know
where they want to live or buying a
house or anything like that they're like
hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt
they've never had a paycheck and that's
a doctor and if you ask a doctor you
know how do you find a job it's really
hard for them they really struggle with
like negotiating and struggling with
like finding benefits and like you know
asking for paid parking and all these
like tiny things come up that cause
doctors all kinds of grief and it's not
that they're smart I mean it's not that
they're stupid and it's not that they're
lazy
it's that finding a job is a skill that
you actually have to learn how to do and
if you don't do it until you're 34
you're not gonna be good at it it has
nothing to do with being lazy or being
stupid it's just it's a skill it's a
part of your brain that you've never had
to use so gamers are kind of the same
way because if you look at a game a game
breaks down all of your problems for you
it gives you a script of this is level
one and this is level two and this is
level three in an order it'll unlock
level four you have to beat
one two and three but it's kind of like
a very close ended system in medical
school and people who become doctors are
kind of the same way they just go from A
to B to C to D you know you do high
school and then college and then Medical
School and the residency it's like level
one two three and four and each one has
an application and each one has an essay
and most of them have interviews and so
how is that different from a gamer
it's actually kind of the same thing in
both of these situations you have
problems which are very close ended and
you're told what to do so both of these
populations actually struggle with kind
of open-ended or abstract thinking a lot
of doctors also struggle with finding
relationships by the way but that's kind
of a separate issue so now let's compare
that a little bit with someone else
who's let's say doesn't go to medical
school and let's look at how they get
better at open-ended problem-solving so
let's once again start with our fifteen
year old kid but this kid doesn't have
aspirations to be a surgeon so when they
turn 16 you know they're not quite sure
what they want to do they apply for
their first job and so how does a 16
year old find a job they probably like
start working somewhere where they know
someone who's working so they have a
friend who works at a car wash and so
they fill out an application and they
end up getting a job at the car wash or
they have an uncle who has like a I
don't know like a paper supply company
and so they they work at the paper
supply company answering phones
basically the the solution space for
where they can find a job is basically
kind of like what's already in front of
them if they know someone they'll kind
of apply for a job or they'll be driving
down the road and they see like a hiring
sign at a restaurant so they'll start to
become a waiter or they'll like fill out
an application at a place like
McDonald's whatever they sort of start
to find a job in kind of a pretty narrow
area and then what happens is they apply
to college and so in college there's
also kind of a particular solution space
because you know do you want to go to
college but this solution space grows a
little bit bigger than finding your
first job so do you want to go to
college in state or out of state do you
want to go to college you know do you
want to go to a state school or a
private school do you need to apply for
scholarships you need to go someplace
where do you need to kind of stay close
to
home because you can't afford an
apartment so you can stay at home so now
there are a lot more going to college
become sort of this abstract problem
that has a bunch of different variables
and people start to learn how to
navigate those variables and so that
person goes to college as well and now
they have to think about well what do I
want to major and they haven't decided
to become a doctor already at the age of
15 so they talked to their advisors and
they're like okay I'm gonna be like an
undeclared major or unspecified major or
something like that and they have to
figure out okay do I want to be an
engineer or do I want to study finance
or do I want to study philosophy or
biology and so they have to think about
like what they want to be when they grow
up and that's kind of an abstract
problem and so they they've try it a
little bit and they decide to pick
something and then they when they finish
college they start looking for a job and
so that too becomes kind of like a now
the net is even wider so do you want to
work in the same town that you went to
college because now you have more
options because you're actually gonna be
getting a paycheck so you don't have to
live close to home so now the number of
things that you can do actually
increases and you have to think do I
want to work in the country or out of
the country do I want to live in
California or live in New York or say in
Texas do I want to be close to family
where do I want to live what kind of job
do I want to find and so they start the
job hunting process and then they end up
getting a job and let's say they went to
the University of Texas at Austin and
they decide they want to move out west
to California and so they go to
California and then after a couple of
years later let's say they ended up
working in finance they decide that they
want to go back to school and they want
to get their MBA and so once again
they're kind of faced with this question
of when do I want to get my MBA do I
want to get it after two years or three
years or four years and do they want to
get do it they want to take the
promotion or do they want to go to
business school so these problems become
more and more abstract and let's say
that they go to business school then
after they leave business school do they
want to go back to the old company or do
they want to move to a new company do
they want to move out of finance into
let's say Investment Banking or private
equity or marketing or do they want to
work in the startup world so these are
all really abstract problems but in the
case of this this last person that we're
talking about you can kind of see it
each
the way the number of variables they
have to deal with to grow 16 year old
finding a job has like 10 options
applying to college has like 20 options
choosing what to major and also has like
10 options
where you first find a job has like 50
options when you decide to go to
graduate school has like a hundred
options and so it each step of the way
this person their brain is actually
learning this skill of taking an
abstract problem in breaking it down
into individual pieces and so this
person when a gamer looks at the person
who's successful in 30 in their age and
says wow that person is like motivated
because they now are a manager at an
investment bank they look at that and
they say that guy's got to be smart and
he's not lazy but it's more subtle than
that
it's not that they're they're lazy or
not lazy it's that they have learned how
to manage this broader and broader set
of abstract problems and have gotten
better at open-ended problem solving
whereas the guy who's a gamer instead of
getting a job at 16 he plays video games
for 6 hours a day when he goes to
college he doesn't spend a whole lot of
time going to different clubs activities
and and figuring out what to major and
he just picks computer science or like
graphic design because he wants to be a
video game programmer he spends a lot of
his free time just playing video games
when he finishes college he applies for
a narrower set of jobs and spends most
of his time just playing video games
when he goes he may not even go to grad
school because at that point he's sort
of like his abstract thinking stops it
stops growing and so then he ends up
being 30 years old and comparing himself
to the his buddy who's who's a manager
and an investment bank and he says wow
that guy is like that guy's really
hard-working and I'm lazy and that's the
reason I am where I am the fascinating
thing is that's just not true it just
isn't true it's not about laziness it's
not about intelligence it's about
developing a particular cognitive skill
of taking an open-ended abstract problem
and being able to chunk it up and what I
found when I work with gamers when I
work with you guys is that if we can sit
down and actually do this consciously
take a
problem that you have and operationalize
it break it down into its component
parts and figure out what you need to do
it each step of the way
then the gamer suddenly starts moving
forward in life they suddenly start
getting better they start becoming more
financially independent they find better
jobs they even find girlfriends because
we talk a little bit about getting into
shape and upgrading your wardrobe and
figuring out what to like getting rid of
the fedora and then like shaving that
neckbeard that you've got and like
gamers start to like do better in life
if we chunk down why they can't find a
girlfriend it's because of the
way you dress and it's because of the
way that you smell and it's because
you're so socially awkward
because you spend the whole day be in
front of a computer screen so before you
do that you got to go and take an improv
class once they take an improv class
they feel more comfortable socially and
they feel more comfortable around women
and then women don't think that they're
creepy because they know how to interact
with limit and so even something like
finding a girlfriend is like an abstract
problem but that can be chunked down
into like fashion in hygiene and social
skills and getting physically into shape
and not living in your mom's
basement like that counts for a lot when
you're trying to find a girlfriend so
you can break that down into pieces and
once you start working on the pieces
it's amazing how much better your life
is gonna get but in order to do that you
have to learn how to actually break down
that problem because your brain right
now hasn't needed to do that
it hasn't needed to do it because you
spend so many hours playing video games
where that's been done for you so one of
the things that I invite you guys to
think a little bit about is do you
actually know how to achieve the goal
that you say you want if you want to be
financially independent do you know the
steps around doing that and if you sit
down and you start writing those steps
on a piece of paper I am almost certain
that you're gonna come up with like 6 or
7 which are gonna be pretty abstract in
and of themselves and that's when you're
gonna stop and that's when you're gonna
have trouble and so what we need to do
if you want to start moving forward in
life is teach your brain how to take
that abstract problem and turn it into a
concrete one because the neat thing
about gamers is if I give you a concrete
problem and I give you a concrete set of
tools you'll figure it out on your own
so the first step is taking an
open-ended problem in turning it into a
closed-ended problem and we'll talk a
little bit more about how to do that any
thoughts or questions